_Live conversation 9/11/20._

**WRENCH**

Alrighty then. This is Finchley Place. I'm Wrench, this is Suspended Reason. We're starting this project, The Inexact Sciences, because we feel there's something in science that's having trouble getting to the frontier of certain things that can't be repeated in the same way we'd like things to be for physics-like science. But at the same time, the people who are doing things in a softer way, who are philosophizing about the general nature of social dynamics or language—which are two things we think about a lot—aren't really capturing or rigorizing—they're doing a lot of conceptual engineering, a lot of rhetorical carving out of various things to impress their peers and it's not adding up to a system. So we've started this back-and-forth series of letters to get at what's going on with language and why it's so hard to understand what's going on with language, because our vocabulary and our conceptual space for what we're dealing with is so impoverished it actually gets in the way. It occludes the distinctions you want to make because you're stuck with the definitions that are easy to draw on because others already know them. 

Suspended sent me a letter; I sent him one back; they're available, we'll put the link up. And basically Suspended started off discussing three examples to show why the idea of "meaning" is complicated. So the three examples are: Tracking an animal in the woods, where you see signs of things that obviously have meaning, even though the idea of intention is more or less not there; the animal doesn't intend to leave tracks in a way we can define. [Second] the idea of driving down a city street, where there are lots of signals such as traffic signals that have meaning, but there isn't really intention however there is intention with the drivers around you, which creates an ecosystem of conventions and intentions. [Third] something we haven't yet talked about deeply, which is dressing up for a social event, and the intentionality of how you present yourself. 

Suspended ended with a few question; I end up [in my letter] analyzing a bunch of them, and he hasn't told me crap about what he thinks of my letter, other than it's "good," i.e. a generic praise just to avoid having to talk about this shit.

**REASON**

No, I used the word "great" actually.

**WRENCH**

Well maybe you should give some context on that. 

**REASON**

I feel like understanding the Inexact Sciences project just a little bit will help give context as to why we're even writing these letters. Kevin Scharp, the philosopher, has this nice quote about the philosophy pipeline:

> For the past 400 years, philosophy has been shrinking. That is a sociological fact. Physics, geology, chemistry, economics, biology, anthropology, sociology, meteorology, psychology, linguistics, computer science, cognitive science—these subject matters were all part of philosophy in 1600. As the scientific revolution ground on, more and more sciences were born. This process is essentially philosophy outsourcing its subject matter as something new—sciences. The process is rather complicated, but the most important part of it is getting straight on the right concepts to use so that the subject matter can be brought under scientific methodology. Ultimately, the radical therapeutic program – showing the fly the way out of the fly bottle – is taking an active role in this outsourcing process. Identify conceptual defects (Socratic idea) and craft new concepts that avoid the old defects (Nietzschean idea) with an eye toward preparing that philosophical subject matter for outsourcing as a science.

Essentially, philosophy outsources its subject matter as soon as something gets rigorized enough that you can actually verify things, you can be rigorous and ask questions that are tractable to answer. And a big part of preparing these fields is what Scharp calls a "therapeutic" program, fixing up the language so it's steady and stable enough to build off it, or coordinate on it, as you'd say Wrench. 

One of our friends, Stephen Holtzman, talks about how we're in a statistical adolescence, an awkward in-betweenness where statistical techniques do as much harm as they help, and there's maybe a parallel with language. We're in the middle of a very long, very awkward adolescent phase that goes back to Socrates, trying to understand how words mean, what the boundaries are on concepts, how to understand communication. And these problems have really hung up a lot of fields. Philosophy is one of them but also literary theory has these issues, sociology, psychology. Nobody can quite agree what or how words mean, or what is or isn't included in a definition or an extension, an extension being the set of things a word picks out or names. And it's not clear whether the philosophy of language vocabulary that's been built up to handle these problems, such as extension or connotation or denotation, even makes sense or helps us understand these problems. 

Part of the project with these letters is trying to start from scratch—instead of trying to salvage of build off these concepts like "meaning," or connotation vs. denotation, or intentionality and interpretation, actually breaking away from these concepts and their baggage and see if progress can be made on understanding these issues by coming in from a different angle, or factoring them from the ground on up. That's the spirit with which these letters started: let's taboo these words "meaning" and "intentionality" and instead maybe talk about metaphors for communication that aren't typically thought of as such. One of the things your letter, Wrench, really comes down to is that there isn't so much a meaning that exists "inside" words, and there isn't even so much an intended meaning a speaker's trying to get across, but rather there's a complex matrix of goals and desires that is always in play [shaping behavior]. That there's this predictive forecasting that happens where you stare down the forking paths and say, well, from past experience I know if I head in this direction or bring up this subject, it could go down a conversational and life avenue—since there are real ramifications to talk—that I don't want to go down. Even if all that reasoning only manifests as a feeling, a repulsion or attraction.

I'm gonna read a couple quotes now from your letter. You say,

> In this conversation it is clear that we are trying to get something done via this public interpretive status. And it is always this “something” that overtakes understanding, because there are inevitably distinctions that will be lost, but when pointed-out we would shrug at and say: “Well, that wasn’t really the point, anyway.”

This gets across the way there's a hierarchy of ends, a subordination of parts to wholes, and you could present something as a piece of evidence, but the point of bringing it up is only to support the larger goal, to convince somebody or defend yourself or whatever it might be. And so understanding "intent" as the literal semantic meaning of sentences might be a red herring.

**WRENCH**

I think a lot of people, a lot of linguistics or philosophers of language, would agree with what we're saying and _yet_, they'd interpret things as follows. They'd say there is some literal meaning—or they'll say something more complicated about the general structure of this words, and that this structure is a tool shaped in such a way that it can complete multiple ends—and I think this gets at something we talk about a lot, that there's some notion of compositionality that doesn't just act at the word level, it acts at the level of what people call "meaning." And like we said, we're tabooing that word, so I won't say that's what meaning _is_, but a lot of people would call this "meaning," because there are many cases in which the sentence is shaped by what it's trying to do. And as soon as someone see's what it's trying to do, that changes the literal shape that it means, and it changes how it's used and interpreted by the interlocutor. And that seems to be a key point of divergence. That we don't just start with something literal, and then that literal thing ends up affecting the various meanings, communications, and feelings of the interlocutors; more that the actual literal shape of whatever we want to call meaning or interpretation is a process by which intention ends up reshaping the protein itself. If you wanna think about it as a protein where there's some kind of sequenced code, and yes that code is static, it doesn't change except upon chemical reaction, but as it folds, the shape of the thing itself re-shapes itself again. And people seem not to get into that kind of reflexivity, they don't want to go there, they say there must be a similar structure, and that's one of the things I'd like to sit down with. I think you'd agree, but I wanted to say it explicitly; if you don't I'd be even more curious to hear about it.

